April 2023 newsletter (#213)
readthedocs/blog: newsletter-april-2023.rst

- ⚙️ Added a new build variable ``READTHEDOCS_CANONICAL_URL`` that's useful for projects that want to be aware of the canonical base URL while building.
  `Read more in our docs <https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/environment-variables.html#envvar-READTHEDOCS_CANONICAL_URL>`__.
- 📊️ All of our websites now use `Plausible <https://plausible.io/>`__ for analytics.
- 🔒️ Fixed vulnerability: `Cache poisoning: serving arbitrary content on documentation sites  <https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/security/advisories/GHSA-mp38-vprc-7hf5>`__

You can always see the latest changes to our platforms in our :doc:`Read the Docs Changelog <readthedocs:changelog>`.

.. figure:: img/screenshot-docs-diataxis-update.png
   :alt: A screenshot of our current documentation after the refactor
   
   Here is how our documentation looks in April 2023.

Upcoming features
-----------------

- 📚️ We are still doing changes in our documentation structure and content.
- ⚡️ *A lot of work* is happening these days on bigger features.
  In :doc:`the last newsletter </newsletter-march-2023>`, we mentioned the new Dashboard.
  On the side of that,

>   we are also building a new generic JavaScript client and API that will give additional features to any documentation project or static site built on the platform.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we split this into two?

- new theme (maybe with a screenshot as well?)
- the javascript client

Author: It's just that the new theme was already mentioned with a screenshot :) https://blog.readthedocs.com/newsletter-march-2023/

Author: Also added another notable mention from previous newsletter on about.readthedocs.com, I think it makes sense now as a separate item.

.. post:: March 30, 2023
   :tags: newsletter, python
   :author: Ben
   :location: MLM
   :category: Newsletter

.. meta::
   :description lang=en:
      Company updates and new features from the last month,
      current focus, and upcoming features.

Read the Docs newsletter - April 2023
=====================================

News and updates
----------------

- 📚️ Over the past 6 months, we gradually refactored our user documentation to align with the `Diátaxis Framework <https://diataxis.fr>`__. The results have now crystialized in the structure of the navigation sidebar and the landing page on `docs.readthedocs.io <https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__.
- 🌄️ The first proof-of-concept for a new API and JavaScript library has been test-driven. It is capable of displaying a menu matching our current :doc:`flyout menu <readthedocs:flyout-menu>` visible in the below screenshot.

>   The big difference will be that the new API and library will be useful for any documentation framework or static site generator to allow for full control of the new flyout menu and access to API data.

Reviewer: It seems there is no screenshot showing this. The screenshot shows the search modal.

Reviewer: Continuing with the "any documentation framework" part, it could mention that in the screenshot it shows a project using Docusaurus where these features weren't previously supported

Author: ```suggestion
- 🌄️ The first proof-of-concept for a new API and JavaScript library has been test-driven. It is capable of displaying a menu matching our current :doc:`flyout menu <readthedocs:flyout-menu>` and :doc:`integrated server side search <readthedocs:/server-side-search/index>`.
  The new library is useful for *any* documentation framework or static site generator to allow for full control of the new flyout menu, integrated search and general access to API data. See the screenshot further down where the integrated search in action on the documentation framework Docusaurus.
```

Author: Added a mention of build.commands and merged the block with the one further down.

- 📊️ All of our websites now use `Plausible <https://plausible.io/>`__ for analytics.
- ⚙️ Added a new build variable ``READTHEDOCS_CANONICAL_URL`` that's useful for projects that want to be aware of the canonical base URL while building.
  `View docs <https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/environment-variables.html#envvar-READTHEDOCS_CANONICAL_URL>`__.

> - ⚙️ Added a new build variables ``READTHEDOCS_GIT_CLONE_URL``, ``READTHEDOCS_GIT_IDENTIFIER``, and ``READTHEDOCS_GIT_COMMIT_HASH`` for projects that need to access Git data while building.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ⚙️ Added new build variables ``READTHEDOCS_GIT_CLONE_URL``, ``READTHEDOCS_GIT_IDENTIFIER``, and ``READTHEDOCS_GIT_COMMIT_HASH`` for projects that need to access Git data while building.
```

  `View docs <https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/environment-variables.html#envvar- READTHEDOCS_GIT_CLONE_URL>`__.
- 🔒️ Fixed vulnerability: `Cache poisoning: serving arbitrary content on documentation sites  <https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/security/advisories/GHSA-mp38-vprc-7hf5>`__

You can always see the latest changes to our platforms in our :doc:`Read the Docs Changelog <readthedocs:changelog>`.

.. figure:: img/screenshot-docs-diataxis-update.png
   :alt: A screenshot of our current documentation after the refactor
   
   A screenshot of how our user documentation looks in April 2023.

Upcoming features
-----------------

- 📚️ We are still doing changes in our documentation structure and content.

> - ⚡️ *A lot of work* is happening these days on bigger features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ⚡️ *A lot of work* is happening these days on big front-end features.
```

.. post:: March 30, 2023
   :tags: newsletter, python
   :author: Ben
   :location: MLM
   :category: Newsletter

.. meta::
   :description lang=en:
      Company updates and new features from the last month,
      current focus, and upcoming features.

Read the Docs newsletter - April 2023
=====================================

News and updates
----------------

- 📚️ Over the past 6 months, we gradually refactored our user documentation to align with the `Diátaxis Framework <https://diataxis.fr>`__. The results have now crystialized in the structure of the navigation sidebar and the landing page on `docs.readthedocs.io <https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__.
- 🌄️ The first proof-of-concept for a new API and JavaScript library has been test-driven. It is capable of displaying a menu matching our current :doc:`flyout menu <readthedocs:flyout-menu>`.
  The big difference will be that the new API and library will be useful for any documentation framework or static site generator to allow for full control of the new flyout menu and access to API data.

> - 📊️ All of our websites now use `Plausible <https://plausible.io/>`__ for analytics.

Author: LMK if there's anything I missed here @ericholscher

- ⚡️ *A lot of work* is happening these days on big front-end features.
  In :doc:`the last newsletter </newsletter-march-2023>`, we mentioned the new Dashboard and :doc:`the migration to about.readthedocs.com </website-migration>`.
  What's new is that we've also started building a **generic JavaScript client** accompanied with APIs that will give additional features to *any* documentation project or static site built and served on the Read the Docs platform.
  
  The first proof-of-concept for the new API and JavaScript library has been test-driven.
  It is capable of displaying a menu matching our current :doc:`flyout menu <readthedocs:flyout-menu>` and :doc:`integrated server side search <readthedocs:server-side-search/index>`.

  The new library is useful for *any* documentation framework or static site generator to allow for full control of the new flyout menu, integrated search and general access to API data.
  See the screenshot further down where the integrated search in action on the documentation framework Docusaurus.

  We plan to be rolling this out gradually for Sphinx and MkDocs projects that are currently running their own set of ``build.commands``.

>   Once that happens, we'll be back with news on the blog and documentation about how you can configure it.

Author: @humitos can you have another look here? It's a longer item, but I think it's the most exciting part of the newsletter and I feel like it's exactly the moment to split it into a blog post, yet worth mentioning the progress.

You can see it here: https://readthedocs-blog--213.org.readthedocs.build/newsletter-april-2023/

Author: @humitos said :+1:
